Has the big bang been debunked?

Some people make it sound that way. Are these claims credible?

Not usually.

Here's the thing. The big bang could be falsified 4 times a day for the next 50 years, and it wouldn't make a single difference.

Why?

Because there isn't a theory better than it.

It won't go anywhere until a viable replacement is found.

So, let's find one!

Traditionally the problem is set like this:

You have light traveling through space. If things were "normal" there would be no redshifts. Light would arrive with same wavelength and energy that was emitted.

Ingredients

1. light
2. space

Observed

* cosmic redshift

Theories

1. Dynamic light
2. Dynamic space

Traditionally, our options are something going on with the light, or something going on with space. 

Here is what Edwin Hubble had to say about this in 1937:

>If the primary change is in the wave-length, then red-shifts are probably velocity-shifts. **But the primary change might possibly be a loss of energy, which we would observe as a red-shift**. In the latter case the law of red-shifts would be fully described by the simple statement that **light loses energy in proportion to the distance it travels through space**. 

What Hubble is describing here is usually called tired light.

The observed time dilation of supernovae and quasars definitely rule out tired light theories. 

Really, we should be looking at the problem like this:

Ingredients

1. light
2. space
3. time

Observed

* cosmic redshift
* cosmic time dilation

Theories

1. Dynamic light
2. Dynamic space
3. Dynamic time

Which means we should recognize a third ingredient to this picture, time.

Now we have an alternative to tired light and expansion theories. 

Dynamic time.

We don't have a problem thinking of space as dynamic, and changing size. There doesn't seem to be a reason it can't be time that's changing.


Since we observe time running slower in the past, what if it was?

That would mean light from the past is associated with a slower clock. 

The light would be "stretched" in time, given a lower frequency than expected, redshifting it.


Here's a light clock.

It shoots a pulse of light at a mirror 1/2 light second away, so about 150,000 km away. 

When the light pulse comes back to a detector at the source, that means a second has passed. 

Another light pulse can be fired toward the mirror, and the process repeats.


Let's suppose whenever this happens, a light pulse is also shot into space.


This is all happening far away, and so a very long time ago.

We'll say this is at "redshift z=1"


We in the present, at z=0, are receiving the pulses of light shot out into space.

The pulses were sent 1 second apart, but that was back in the past at z=1.

Time is observed to run at 1/(1+z) speed. So at z=1, time is 1/2 speed.


Our clock, in the present, at z=1, runs at twice the speed as the past clock.

Since it's counting twice as fast, our clock counts 2 seconds in between each pulse of light it receives.


This would mean, according to the clock in the present, the light moving in the light clock in the past had to have been moving at c/2.

Based on the present clock, the speed of light is c/(1+z).


This makes sense because of special relavity. 

All observers should measure the speed of light to be c, 299792 km/s.

If an observer's clock is running at half speed, light has to be moving at half speed too. 

If an observer's clock is running at 1/(1+z) speed, light has to be moving at c/(1+z) in order to be measured as c on that clock.


So the light at z=1 is moving at c/2. And light at z=0, in the present, is moving at c.

What speed does the light travel at between z=1 and z=0?

It will travel at all speeds between c/2 and c

It will travel at c/(1+z) at z=1, z=0.9

If you add them up, we end up getting this:

c log(1+z) = 0.693

Ok.

What's that telling us?


Maybe we should back up.

Let's consider our scenario but minus time dilation for now. Some vanilla spacetime, also called Minkowski spacetime.

Without time dilation, the speed of light is always c, and it take N years for light to travel N light years.

In this hypothesis, the Minkowski time, which has no time dilation, will be called tau.

And it's distance we'll just call r for radius.


Everything is nice and basic special relativty here. Distance r = c tau


Now let's add in the time dilation. 

If we trace the light's path backwards through time, it's at z=0 first, where there is no time dilation.

By z=0.1, time is running a little bit slower, by z=0.5, the light is going at 1/(1+0.5) = 2/3 speed, and then at z=1, it's going at 1/2 speed.


And that all adds up to 0.693,






You know how it feels like time keep going by faster and faster?

What if it was? What if everything just kept getting faster. How would we actually know?

If it wasn't just clocks, but everything, falling objects, light, chemical processes, our brains. If everything was changing speed together, it's not as if we would notice, since our ability to measure time is by relating some proecss to another process, such as a falling object and a clock.

There would be one way. Since light travels at a finite speed, it's well known that light from very very far away shows us what the universe was like in the distant past.

We can see that things like supernovae take longer in the past than they do in the present. The light itself, tells us this too. The frequency and thus energy of light are tied to the rate of clocks when it was emitted. 

If clocks speed up while the light traveled, it would be observed later on to have a lower than expected frequency.







