In 1941 Edwin Hubble announced that he had refuted the expanding universe.

This newspaper artcile is from Decemeber of 1941.

I don't know if any you are history buffs, but the bigger news from that month was that America was entering WWII.

Hubble saught to rejoin the US Army and was requested to work in ballistics. Hubble couldn't find out much about ballistics in the dictionary or Enclyopedia 

So he assumed it was underdeveloped or highly classified. When he went to work for them, he found that ballistics was both underdeveloped and highly classified.

    "Some time after Pearl Harbor, while I was trying to get back into the Infantry, ...

With the war over and a medal of merit for his research, he went back to Mount Wilson in 1946. He was on the adivisory board for a new 200-inch Hale, and in 1949 was the first person to make observations with it.

That telescope was named over Goerge Hale, who was the one who had originally invited Hubble to join Mount Wilson's staff in 1917. 

Although, I don't know if any of your history buffs but in 1917, American entered WWI.

Edwin joined the US Army a few days after completing his doctorate. He sent a telegraph to Hale, saying: "Regret cannot accept your invitation. Am off to the war." 

After the war, Edwin goes right to Mt. Wilson and accepts a position in 1919. 

In 1920 there is an event in astronomy called "The Great Debate", and it was on whether or not "nebulae" that astronomers observed, like Andromeda, were in between the stars that we see, or, as some had begun to suspect, where separate systems of stars much much futher. 

Everyone today knows that thare galaxies like the Milky Way, billions of 'em!

But 100 years ago, people didn't know that. Though as I said, some had suspected. 

It wasn't until, well, 100 years ago, 1924 that Hubble had made the observations that settled the debate, unveiling these remote nebulae as the "true inhabinitants of the cosmos", which today we call galaxies.

Hubble had used the predictablity of a Cepheid variable star in Andromeda to measure its distance, and prove it's in a group of stars well beyond all the other stars we've observed.

In 1929, he combined the distance measurements of other galaxies with Vesto Slipher's measurements of their redshifts using scpectroscopy.

The farther the galaxy, the greater the redshift. 

For many, the redshift-distance relationship could mean only one thing, primarily the physicists who had worked out this as a possibility a few years earlier. The galaxies all seem to be moving away from us, so the only logical explanation is that everything is moving away from everythign.

The universe was expanding.

Edwin Hubble was not one them.





Our story begins in 1917, when Edwin Hubble was offered a position at Mount Wilson Observatory by George Hale. 


    Hubble spent an entire night finishing his thesis, completed the oral defense of his dissertation the following morning, and then proceeded to enlist in the U.S. Army a few days later. 

    He sent a telegraph to Hale, saying: "Regret cannot accept your invitation. Am off to the war."

    https://fi.edu/en/news/case-files-edwin-hubble


Our story begins in 1917 when Edwin Hubble 

In 1941 Edwin Hubble announced that he had refuted the expanding universe.

This newspaper artcile is from Decemeber of 1941.

I don't know if any you are history buffs, but the bigger news from that month was that America was entering WWII.

    "Some time after Pearl Harbor, while I was trying to get back into the Infantry, I was called in by Army Ordnance and told, in effect, to stop that nonsense, that I had been ear-marked long before for a job in Ordnance. . . . My name, they told me, was top of the list because ballistics had a curious affinity with astronomy, and, moreover, as a line officer in the last war I might appreciate the significance of some of the problems as viewed from positions in front of the guns as well as behind the guns. . . . I rushed to a dictionary. Ballistics, it seemed, is the science of hurling missiles against an enemy. This seemed a trifle thin so I turned to the encyclopaedia; there I found a long article, but it puzzled me. Ballistics was either underdeveloped or highly classified. So I went to Aberdeen, partly to find out. . . . I found out. . . . Ballistics was both underdeveloped and highly classified." 


Hubble's work as an astronomer was to end, and he'd re-joined the Army to work on basllistics. 






    While finishing up the work for his doctorate in 1917, George Ellery Hale had invited Hubble to join the staff of Mount Wilson Observatory in Pasadena, California. Hubble spent an entire night finishing his thesis, completed the oral defense of his dissertation the following morning, and then proceeded to enlist in the U.S. Army a few days later. He sent a telegraph to Hale, saying: "Regret cannot accept your invitation. Am off to the war."

We've been talking about his 1937 book/lectures, but I found this article from December of 1941:



So, I mean, what timing.

From a biography I found:

    Hubble worked at the Mount Wilson Observatory until the summer of 1942, when he left to do war work at the Aberdeen Proving Ground. He has described his assignment in the following manner: "Some time after Pearl Harbor, while I was trying to get back into the Infantry, I was called in by Army Ordnance and told, in effect, to stop that nonsense, that I had been ear-marked long before for a job in Ordnance. . . . My name, they told me, was top of the list because ballistics had a curious affinity with astronomy, and, moreover, as a line officer in the last war I might appreciate the significance of some of the problems as viewed from positions in front of the guns as well as behind the guns. . . . I rushed to a dictionary. Ballistics, it seemed, is the science of hurling missiles against an enemy. This seemed a trifle thin so I turned to the encyclopaedia; there I found a long article, but it puzzled me. Ballistics was either underdeveloped or highly classified. So I went to Aberdeen, partly to find out. . . . I found out. . . . Ballistics was both underdeveloped and highly classified." 

https://www.nasonline.org/publicatio...bble-edwin.pdf

He seems to have a sense of humor.

In any case, to attest to some of W.D.Clinger's claims, I found this interesting tidbit:

    Theories, in his opinion, were an appropriate cocktail conversation. He was essentially an observer, and as he said in The Realm of the Nebulae: "Not until the empirical resources are exhausted, need we pass on to the dreamy realms of speculation." Edwin never exhausted those empirical resources. "I am an observer, not a theoretical man," he attested, and a lightly spoken word in a lecture or in a letter showed that observation was his choice.


    https://fi.edu/en/news/case-files-edwin-hubble
    https://www.nasonline.org/publications/biographical-memoirs/memoir-pdfs/hubble-edwin.pdf
    https://sites.astro.caltech.edu/palomar/about/telescopes/hale.html
    
    https://hubblesite.org/contents/news-releases/2011/news-2011-15.html
    https://hypertextbook.com/facts/1999/RachelHoover.shtml
    https://www.earth.com/news/james-webb-captures-galaxies-that-are-too-old-to-exist/
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02242

    Hubble 1924
    https://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1925PA.....33..252H

    Hubble 1929
    https://europepmc.org/backend/ptpmcrender.fcgi?accid=PMC522427&blobtype=pdf

    Craig Baker, CC BY-SA 4.0, 2018
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mount_Wilson_Observatory#/media/File:Hooker_Telescope,_Mt_Wilson.jpg