Haven't found a PDF


https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979Natur.277..633C/abstract

 Photon decay in curved space-time

    Crawford, D. F. 

RECENT astrophysical observations1,2 have raised doubts as to whether the large redshifts of distant galaxies (the Hubble redshift) are due entirely to cosmological expansion. The strongest argument3 in favour of cosmological expansion is that there is no known hypothesis consistent with the laws of physics (other than the Doppler shift hypothesis) that can explain the observed redshifts. An alternative explanation-a gradual energy loss of photons due to their interaction with curved space-time-is considered here. The basic premise is that because photons have a finite spread they are subject to tidal stresses and that this provides a mechanism for the transfer of momentum from the photon to the mass producing curved space-time. Any transfer of momentum without an equivalent transfer of energy will destroy the concept of the photon as a single elementary particle. It is therefore postulated that the interaction of the photon with curved space-time causes it to lose energy in the form of very low energy secondary photons. As well as providing an explanation for the Hubble redshift this hypothesis can also explain the solar limb effect, that is, the increasing redshift of solar spectral lines as the viewpoint approaches the limb of the Sun.

----

https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00653609



    Published: May 1970

On the cosmological red shift

    Stanisław Bellert 

Astrophysics and Space Science volume 7, pages211–230(1970)Cite this article

    31 Accesses

    5 Citations

    Metrics details

Abstract

The paper is an extension of this author's hypothesis, presented inAstrophys. Space Sci. 3 (1969), 268, which explains the red shift in terms of a geometry of static space and stationary observers. The author introduces here the notions of ‘metric with an observer’, ‘observed distance’ and ‘space of observations’; he considers the problem of the equivalence of stationary observers and discusses the relation between the hypothesis, the special theory of relativity and Maxwell equations. Attention is drawn to the agreement between the hypothesis and the experimental results discussed by Shamir and Fox, and those discussed by Kennedy and Thorndike.


-----
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01006138

    Published: April 1974

Nature of the cosmological red shift

    A. Ya. Kipper 

Astrophysics volume 10, pages169–174(1974)Cite this article 


----


Different Hypotheses for the Energy
Degradation of Photons

Apart from the hypothesis of gravitational drag of photons tentatively
outlined by Zwicky and subsequently developed in the above
mentioned studies by Weinstein and Keeney, Ghosh, Ferrari and
myself (Kropotkin 1988, 1989), several hypotheses based on other
postulates have been proposed. All of them yield the same
exponential formula for a gradual degradation of the energy of
photons. More comprehensive studies may possibly show how to
combine these versions with the gravitational hypothesis.They surely
reflect different aspects of quantum electromagnetic processes
occurring in the photon under the influence of cosmic gravity field.

One of the first attempts at a non-Doppler explanation of the
cosmological redshift was Bogorodsky’s hypothesis of the ‘aging of
photons’ resulting from a specific gravitational self-induction, caused
by proper gravitational field of the photon (Bogorodsky 1940).

An interesting approach to the problem of the emission of
gravitational waves by a photon was suggested by Brekhovskikh.
Using the analogy of the aging of photons with Cherenkov effect and
Rosen’s conclusions on the peculiarities of electromagnetic and
gravitational waves, he deduced that a spherical electromagnetic wave
radiates gravitational waves in the course of its propagation
(Brekhovskikh 1945).

Fürth later tried to make an analogy between the photon and the
electron, which loses its energy by radiation when it moves along a
curved path. He suggested that a photon gradually loses its energy by
emission of gravitons or gravitational waves because it moves along a
curved trajectory. The radius of curvature of this path corresponds to
R, i.e. radius of Riemann curvature of the Metagalaxy (Fürth 1964).
Another advocate of the theory of aging of photons, the Romanian
astronomer Gerasim, also proposes the emission of gravitons by
photons (Gerasim 1975).

We have already mentioned a version of photon aging suggested
by de Broglie (1962, 1966). The same assumption concerning a non-
zero rest mass of photon was used by Yourgrau and Woodward
(1971, 1975) in combination with the Proca equations of
elecrodynamics.

Crawford (1979), Horedt (1973) and Popov (1978) regarded the
exponential formula of energy degradation of photons as a formula of
spontaneous decay of photons. Popov has defined several features of
a hypothetical particles generated in the course of the photon decay.
According to Kipper (1974, 1979), if the vacuum is a complex of
electromagnetic oscillators, it must have a minute non-zero electrical
conductivity, σ = 10 –17 sec –1 . He equates this approximately to the
value of the Hubble constant H. From this comes the conclusion that
photon energy decreases gradually due to the interaction of
electromagnetic waves with oscillators in the vacuum. The energy of
radiation is transferred slowly to the vacuum. Hornbostel and
Marcinkowski (1971), meanwhile, have considered the aging of
photons as a spontaneous decrease of frequency in the
electromagnetic wave group.